[Tomoya]: I was only living
because it was too much trouble
to die.
I got up in the morning...
I went to work...
I ate dinner...
and I went to sleep at night.
It's like my body
was doing it out of habit.
That's how I lived
every day of my life.
I worked my body
to the absolute limit.
I wanted to forget everything,
so I let work swallow my
life... swallow everything.
[Boss]: Okazaki, Why don't you
call it a night? It's late.
It's fine. I'll be done
in just a second.
Now, don't get me wrong,
I appreciate all the
work you do for us...
but if you keep pushing
yourself like that you're going
to end up making yourself sick.
You know, you're not even
taking time off for Obon.
Don't worry about me.
I'm doing it because I want to.
If you don't take off every once
in a while, you're going to
get me in trouble
with the government.
[Tomoya]:
After work was rough on me.
It was even worse
when I had a day off.
I would throw my money away
just to kill time...
to stay away from home.
I was hiding from reality
because that was the only thing
holding me together.
I hate this town.
But even if I moved away, I
wouldn't have anywhere to go...
I wouldn't have anything to do.
I tried to shut everything out.
To live without
thinking of anything.
I wanted to wipe my mind clean.
I wanted to forget
what happened.
Everything I did was wrong.
Everything was a mistake.
@The fact that I met her...
The fact that we fell in love...
that we got married...
The fact that we had a baby...
It was all one big mistake
I couldn't take back.
["I"]: It takes a wish for
this junk to take shape.
Maybe that's why
I can't do it alone.
No... I knew that's
what it needed...
a wish from the heart.
That's why I needed her.
Because I didn't have a heart...
Because I wasn't human.
You're crying, aren't you?
@Is it cause youúremembered
something sad?
@This world is aúsad
place, isn't it?
Soon, everything here
will be buried in white.
It'll get even colder
and I'll stop moving.
@Then you'll be left all
aloneúin this cold, white
wasteland.
[doorbell rings]
Hello?
Hi Tomoya! How are you doing?
Sanae...?
Were you sleeping?
Sorry if I came at a bad time.
Oh, no. It's fine. No problem.
[Tomoya]: Are you alone?
Yep. Just me, myself, and I.
Uh, sorry, could you
hold on just a sec?
This apartment's a mess.
Lemme clean up real fast.
[Sanae]: It certainly is hot
out there today, isn't it?
Yeah...
Still, even if it's
a little unpleasant,
you can't stay
inside all day long.
Yeah. Yoshino tells me
the same thing-
he says I need to get out more.
But still.. There's no point
in going out by myself
on such a hot day.
[Sanae]: Then how about
going on a date with me?
Huh?
[giggle]
[Tomoya]: What's gotten
into you all of a sudden?
[Sanae]: What do you mean? Every
once in a while, I feel like
going out
with a younger guy.
What's wrong with that?
[Tomoya]: Whether it's wrong or
not, I think you should've
picked
someone other than me.
[Sanae]: Why would you say that?
You're sweet, funny,
and really handsome, too.
Why should I settle
for anyone else?
[Tomoya]: I don't
think I'm that great.
I feel like I'm always
taking advantage of you.
I hardly recognize
this place anymore.
So I take it you don't come
by the station very often?
No, I stay on my side of town.
You haven't had time off
in so long.
Why don't you take a vacation
for a week or two?
Actually, the company keeps
nagging me to take time off.
I think they'd love that.
Great! Then why don't
we take a trip somewhere?
What, you mean
just the two of us?
I might be crazy enough
to agree to that.
That would be fun, wouldn't it?
But for this trip, I was
thinking everyone could go.
Who's "everyone"?
You know! Everyone!
[giggles] C'mon, Mom, hurry!
Let's get some juice!
Use your inside voice, you're
bothering the other people.
You know, Akio
really misses you, too.
He's always talking
about getting together
and having a drink with you.
That's not the problem...
You worry too much! Come on!
I dunno; I'll think about it.
[phone ringing]
[Sanae]: It's Sanae. Have you
made up your mind about the
trip?
Oh, not yet. I still need
to think about it.
[Sanae]ÚAll right. Then keep
thinking@and I'll call you back
later.
[chuckle]
Really wants me
to go on that trip...
[phone ringing]
Hello?
[Sanae]: So,
have you thought about it yet?
[Tomoya]: Fine, Sanae. You win.
[Sanae]ÚThen I take
it that's a yes?
Sure. Okay, I'll take
the end of next week off
so I can have a four-day
weekend, including Sunday.
Will that do the trick?
[Sanae]ÚThat's
perfect! Thank you!
[Tomoya]: Of course, I wasn't
sure if I really wanted to go.
But I felt like I'd
be betraying Sanae
if I turned her down
for something so simple.
@She's done so much for me...
the least I could doúis
go on one little trip.
[Tomoya]: I'm here!
Sanae, hello?
Old man?
Looks like they
left me a note...
[Sanae]: Dear Tomoya... I'm
sorry, but something sudden just
came up.
I'm afraid Akio and I
had to leave.
Please take care of things
while we're gone.
Love, Sanae.
Y-you're kidding me, right?
Nagisa...
[footsteps]
Hm?
Ushio?
Stop hiding. You don't
have to be so nervous.
Now, come on out, okay?
So Sanae and the old man
had to leave, huh?
What are we gonna do?
@I want Sanae...
Didn't you hear me?
I just said Sanae isn't here.
@I want Akki...
The old man's not here either.
You gotta be kidding me.
What, did they
just leave without
telling you anything at all?
[Tomoya]: So what
do you want to do?
I wanna go on a trip...
Yeah, that ain't happening.
Sanae and the old man
are gone, remember?
So you wanna go on a
trip alone, is that it?
@No, I wanna goúwith
Sanae and Akki!
What did I just tell you?
What the hell am I
supposed to do...?
Sanae and the old man have
been taking care of Ushio
for the past five years.
I was at work on her
first day of kindergarten
and I didn't even take her
to the Shichi-Go-San festival.
Sanae would bring her over
to my apartment sometimes,
but I hardly even looked at her.
We're more like
strangers than family.
Ushio.
Are you trying to hide from me?
I can still see you...
Don't just stand there.
Come sit with me.
You can sit down.
Have it your way.
Anyway, uhh...
Wherever the heck they went,
I'm sure the old man and Sanae
will be back later tonight.
For now, let's just stay
here and wait. Sound good?
But the trip...
Don't worry, I'm sure
you can go somewhere nice
after they get back.
Until then, why don't
you play by yourself?
Okay.
I guess she's kind
of a tomboy, huh?
[crash]
Ushio!
That's what you get for
running in the house.
Did you hurt yourself?
You get a scrape anywhere?
Looks like you're inúgood shape.
Be careful, okay?
Is that the toy
you were playing with?
Mm-hmm.
Huh. Seems like poor Mr. Turtle
didn't survive the fall.
I'm sorry... Mr. Turtle...
Nothing a little glue
can't fix up, right?
Hang on a sec.
I'll put it back together.
You can still see the crack, but
it's not all that noticeable.
Beats having its head
torn off at least.
Don't play with it
till it dries.
Otherwise the
wheels'll get stuck.
Did she understand what I said?
It's not my problem.
What, is something wrong?
Mr. Turtle won't move anymore.
[Tomoya]: Ah, I thought so!
@I told you not to play with
itúuntil the glue dried, didn't
I?
@Well, it's busted. The
wheelúwon't turn anymore. Sorry.
You can't fix him again?
@Nope, he's done.úAs
good as dead.
@What should I do
now?úThrow him in the trash?
[gasps] Mmm-mmm, mmm!
@Hey, I'mújust kidding.
@Hm? Is thereúsomething
else you want?
I want Sanae.
@What, isúshe back now?
No, she's gone.
@I see...
I'm getting hungry...
@I'll go buy us some
dinner.úAnything in particular
you want?
@If you don't give
meúa suggestion,
@then youúcan't complain!
[Isogai]: Okazaki,
I haven't seen you in ages!
Oh, uh, hello.
@Aren't you aúlucky girl, Ushio?
@Are you going shoppingúwith
your Daddy today?
Huh?
W-when did you get here?
I'm sorry to hear that the two
of you have been living apart.
Not that I blame you.
I know you work full-time
and it's hard for a child
to grow up in a
single-parent home.
Oh, but you do visit each
other sometimes, don't you?
Yeah... Once in a while.
@Of course; I'músure
you'd be lonely
@if you didn'túsee each other.
@Even if you live apart, úyou
two are still family, right?
Uh... y-yeah, of course.
Bye-bye Ushio! You have
fun with your Daddy!
[sneezes]
[Tomoya]: Here. Eat up.
Come on, help yourself.
You're a big girl;
You can eat on your own.
I'm grateful for this meal.
Bitter...
It's bitter?
Oh. It's the pepper, huh?
Sorry, but you can't
expect me to make fried rice
without pepper; Just be
a good girl and eat it.
Nuh-uh.
Come on, Ushio, give me a break,
didn't Sanae teach you
not to be a picky eater?
Yeah, but the food Sanae cooks
me isn't all icky.
Fine. Don't eat it.
Would you eat it if
I take the pepper out?
Uh-huh.
But it might taste
even worse if I do that.
Rice.
What kind? You just
want some plain rice?
Uh-huh.
All right, well
that's easy for me...
[Tomoya]:
Here you go. Plain rice.
That's an
interestingúcombination you got
there...
fried rice with rice.
Blegh!
[Tomoya]ÚWhat do you think
you're doing?! I just want this.
If that's all you eat,
while I'm eating fried rice,
then it'll look
like child abuse.
Seasoning now, huh?
I am grateful for this meal.
[Tomoya]: I'm starting to think
they're not coming home tonight.
You're up too, huh?
I gotta pee...
Then go ahead.
I did it all by myself.
Well, I should hope so.
@[Father]Ú[laughs] We'll
go@swimming later, okay?
@[Boy]ÚDaddy, are
you@gonna swim with us?
[Father]: You bet I am.
I used to be on the swim team.
Um...
What's up?
I gotta go number two.
Then go ahead.
I did it all by myself.
You don't have to brag
about it every single time.
I can do it by myself,
too, you know.
You still wanna go on a trip?
I sure do!
Well, what if it's
just you and me?
Mm-hmm.
You sure? Even with
a mean guy like me?
Sanae and the old man
won't be coming, you know.
They can't. They
haven't come back yet.
That's kind of
strange, isn't it?
They just left us alone, huh?
Yup.
All right, just
the two of us, then.
Mm-hmm.
Didn't forget anything, did you?
Nuh-uh.
Make sure the doors were locked?
Yep!
Then off we go!
Yeah!
I guess it's strange,
but Sanae and the old man
have always been around
when I saw Ushio.
I didn't realize it until now,
but in the five years
since Ushio was born,
this is the first time
we've ever been alone together.
I wonder what this means...
I wonder where we're headed.
Shut up! There's other people
on this train, you know!
Sorry... Mommy...
Ushio. Let me know first
if you're going to
the bathroom, okay?
[Tomoya]: What's wrong?